So now that we have some understanding of why
data privacy and security are important from different perspectives,
we will look at some of the key regulations and standards to get familiar
with key terms when you interact with industry professionals.
Healthcare data security and privacy regulations are ubiquitous around the world.
Most countries have regulations regarding data security and
privacy around electronic health records with varying levels of complexity.
However, for this course,
we will focus on US healthcare regulations but hopefully,
you'll find some common questions or issues
that will apply across all contexts around the world.
Just to set the landscape of some key regulations around the world,
we will focus on the US HIPAA regulation,
which is the key industry regulation you should be familiar with.
HITECH is also important to know and this is really
just an update to HIPAA that accounts for technology.
For the EU, many of you have heard of the GDPR,
and this is generally considered more stringent than
even HIPAA when it comes to protections for patients.
Lastly, the UK's DPA really builds off of
GDPR and requires knowledge of both GDPR and DPA.
While you do not need to be an expert in all of these standards,
you should have some basic familiarity with some of the core tenets that
impacts your work regarding privacy and security of patient data,
and how it affects using data to build these models.
Now, let's go into more details on how HIPAA and HITECH
created the foundation for electronic health records in the US.
HIPAA was passed in 1996 and then updated in
2009 under the HITECH Act to evolve for digital technologies.
While it might seem like EHR has been around for awhile,
it was only a little over a decade ago when
the foundational legislature law was put in place that
made the healthcare community start moving towards
digitizing and putting their records in electronic format.
Even now, many systems are legacy systems that are
built off of transcribe, handwritten notes,
and other unstructured formats that organizations are spending
large amounts of time to normalize and aggregate this info.
So next we will go over some of the key terminology that is relevant for HIPAA.
Probably one of the most important terms that you should be familiar with is PHI,
which stands for protected health information.
As we will learn, PHI is part of HIPAA,
which protects transmission of certain types of
personally identifiable information such as name,
address, and other information.
Why is PHI important?
First, certain information in electronic medical record is considered PHI,
it must comply with HIPAA standards around data security and privacy.
This informs not only how you transmit and store data,
but also data usage rights and restrictions
around building models for other purposes than the original use.
Second, as mentioned before,
PHI by nature is identifiable information and can be used to easily identify a person.
However, please note that omitting this information does
not ensure that a person cannot be identified.
If you recall from our definition of the HIPAA privacy rule when we introduce PHI,
there is a term covered entities that is introduced.
Covered entities are a group of industry organizations defined by HIPAA to be
of one of the three groups: health insurance plans, providers, or clearinghouses.
You can see from the table the types of entities in each category.
These groups transmit protected health information and are
subject to HIPAA regulations regarding these transmissions.
The next term that is related to covered entity is a business associate.
A business associate works with covered entities to provide some service to them
and can be a wide variety of companies from professional services to claims processors.
The key part of this term is that involves the usage of protected health information.
A few things to note about disclosure of data to
BAs under the HIPAA privacy rule is that;
first, it must be only for the purpose allowed by the covered entity.
This is to ideally guard against misuse and prevent BAs
from using the data for things that the covered entity deems appropriate.
This issue will come up when you get a dataset from
a covered entity and build a model for one purpose,
and then you need to go back and want to use the data for
a second purpose and another possible model.
As a BA, you cannot use for the second purpose without the consent of the covered entity,
you must ask for approval again,
which can take some time for legal review and you need to make sure you
comply with the requirements of the covered entity under the HIPAA privacy rule.
A second term that you should be aware of is a BAA or business associates agreement.
This is really just a term that you might come across with the BAA approved
services when you're working with Cloud providers or other vendors.